In all of the previous exercises and lessons,
you've been given a label for a given image that gives you
some sort of classification of the image such as disease or no disease.
But where do these labels come from,
and how accurate are they?
These are two very important questions to answer in
order to evaluate how good your algorithm actually is,
and to explain to the FDA how
your algorithm's performance looks next to the best available solution.
The gold standard for a particular type of data refers to
the method that detects disease with the highest sensitivity and accuracy.
This method is different for different diseases.
Any new method that is developed, for example,
a deep learning algorithm,
can then be compared to this to determine its performance.
Let's take pneumonia as an example.
The gold standard for pneumonia detection is a biopsy.
This however, can take a really long time to come back from the lab,
and patients usually need to be started on antibiotics asap.
Because of this, we often just rely on the radiologist interpretation
clinically so that patients can start on
a treatment and then get a confirmation later from the lab.
Now let's take a look at mammography.
In a typical mammography screen,
radiologists are looking to evaluate
breast density as well as to look for any suspicious findings.
The gold standard for determining breast density is a radiologists read.
If however, a mass is found,
the gold standard for determining if a mass is malignant or benign is a biopsy,
because you can't tell from an image what type of mass something is.
This, like with pneumonia,
takes time to come back from the lab.
For this reason, if a woman shows a mass on her biopsy,
the clinical approach is to contact her informing her of a suspicious mass,
but not making a diagnosis of malignancy until the biopsy results come back.
If a deep learning algorithm could determine malignant versus benign from an image,
imagine how much emotional turmoil this could remove from
all of the women who have to wait to find out their biopsy results.
Often times, the gold standard is unattainable for the algorithm developer.
More often than not,
you will only get a large set of DICOMs.
While these DICOMs will have some information about the studies and the patients,
a lot of information is not available from DICOMs,
for example, radiologists reports which can often be the gold standard.
Even if you can find accompanying radiologists reports,
what happens if you have one million studies?
It probably isn't feasible for you to parse through
each one manually to extract the diagnosis.
As we just mentioned,
biopsy is another common type of golden standard,
but the information is stored outside of the PACS,
and often you only get data that's been transferred from the PACS,
and not the full EMR,
which doesn't contain biopsy.
So you still need to establish
some ground-truth that you can use to compare your algorithm to,
and it should be pretty close to the gold standard.
In ways that your ground-truth is sub-par,
you will have to caveat your approach to the FDA and other stakeholders.